---
layout: post
title: "Gag"
date: 2011-05-12 0:00
comments: false
categories: freedom
---

An anonymous contributor to the Washington Post:

{% blockquote %}
Three years ago, I received a national security letter (NSL) in my capacity as the president of a small Internet access and consulting business. The letter ordered me to provide sensitive information about one of my clients. There was no indication that a judge had reviewed or approved the letter, and it turned out that none had. The letter came with a gag provision that prohibited me from telling anyone, including my client, that the FBI was seeking this information. Based on the context of the demand -- a context that the FBI still won't let me discuss publicly -- I suspected that the FBI was abusing its power and that the letter sought information to which the FBI was not entitled.
{% endblockquote %}

How somber that America's worst enemy turned out to be its own government, using the threat of terrorism as a way to destroy the very tenets of what it should have been standing up for: the American Democracy.

{% blockquote %}
 If I hadn't been under a gag order, I would have contacted members of Congress to discuss my experiences and to advocate changes in the law. 
{% endblockquote %}

If this sentence doesn't chill you to the bone, realize that this is something to expect from a repressive dictatorship.

I started to properly learn about American history after 2001, and I found it fascinating. Here was a country founded on a near-scientific approach to perfecting government, with the idea (taken from [Montesquieu](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_de_Secondat,_Baron_de_Montesquieu)) that there needed to be a [separation and balance of powers](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Separation_of_powers_under_the_United_States_Constitution). Instead of trying to imagine what should be forbidden, this country focused on what should be absolutely safeguarded. It agreed on a concise, beautiful and imperfect definition of what it meant to be part of a free society.

But despite my continued hopes, America has proven to be shaken off balance for the last 10 years. Instead of reacting like a free nation, it was constricted by fear and paranoïa. It turned into an Ouroboros, devouring itself for an untangible threat.

I wouldn't be here today if I had lost hope, but America needs to wake up.