---
layout: post
title: "Thank Me"
date: 2012-12-31 23:00
comments: true
categories: 
published: false
---

A year ago I was thinking about resigning from my job. Not because I disliked the people I worked with, or even because I didn't love what I was doing.

Three years ago I was thinking about leaving my country. Not because I didn't love my family and my friends there.

Seven years ago I couldn't bring myself to admit my dream to work in a magazine had turned into a nightmare. I was fired and given a three hour speech about how I would never achieve anything substantial with creative endeavors.

Twelve years ago I convinced my parents to get a high speed cable internet connection at home. A friend introduced me to [IRC](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_Relay_Chat) and I spent the next five years downloading hundreds of US TV shows. Incidentally, that's the very reason I became fluent in English (and eventually billingual) over the course of two years.

I don't think making life-altering decisions comes to anyone easily. Yet somehow over the last 3 years alone, the decisions I have made created outrageously exciting outcomes.

It's very common in religious cultures to thank deities for "good fortune", or to be grateful for the people that contributed to one's current state of happiness.

I find it strange that so few people spend the time rewarding themselves for being ultimately responsible of all the choices that they make. I think it's unhealthy.

While I wouldn't dare claim that I was never protected, encouraged, loved, helped, inspired or otherwise influenced by the people that surround me, I also remember that I decide who to surround myself with. Very few people in my life have either made decisions on my behalf or pushed me to make different ones. For the most part, that was on me.

So far, there are very few things I regret. Of course I've