---
layout: post
title: "Thank Me"
date: 2012-12-31 23:00
comments: true
categories:
  - life
published: false
---

A year ago I was thinking about resigning from my job. Not because I
disliked the people I worked with, or even because I didn't love what I
was doing.

Three years ago I was thinking about leaving my country. Not because I
didn't love my family and my friends there.

Seven years ago I couldn't bring myself to admit my dream to work in a
magazine had turned into a nightmare. I was fired and given a three hour
speech about how I would never achieve anything substantial with
creative endeavors.

Twelve years ago I convinced my parents to get a high speed cable
internet connection at home. A friend introduced me to
[IRC](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_Relay_Chat) and I spent the
next five years downloading hundreds of US TV shows. Incidentally,
that's the very reason I became fluent in English (and eventually
billingual) over the course of two years.

I don't think making life-altering decisions comes to anyone easily. Yet
somehow over the last 3 years alone, the decisions I have made created
outrageously exciting outcomes.

It's very common in religious cultures to thank deities for "good
fortune", or to be grateful for the people that contributed to one's
current state of happiness.

I find it strange that so few people spend the time rewarding themselves
for being ultimately responsible of all the choices that they make. I
think it's unhealthy.

While I wouldn't dare claim that I was never protected, encouraged,
loved, helped, inspired or otherwise influenced by the people that
surround me, I also remember that I decide who to surround myself with.
Very few people in my life have either made decisions on my behalf or
pushed me to make different ones. For the most part, that was on me.

So far, there are very few things I regret. Of course I've
