---
layout: post
title: "Bose Mode"
date: 2014-07-08 12:34
categories: development
---

My friend Anthony Colangelo and I just recorded the third episode of [our
new podcast](http://themultilogue.com) on Monday. Anthony's the kind of
guy I could have hourlong phone conversations with on anything and it would
be the most entertaining thing ever.

While he was retelling a memorable moment, Anthony reminded me of a funny
little concept we came up with while we were studying at Full Sail University:
Bose Mode.

Although Bose inarguably makes the best noise canceling headphones and
earbuds on the planet, this moniker wasn't really meant as an endorsement.
When this concept emerged, I think we were at the beginning of the second
third of our academic path. This meant that regardless of prior knowledge
everyone in our class had by this point acquired a hefty amount of knowledge.

With the acquisition of knowledge comes an odd phenomenon: it becomes much
more intricate to accomplish something that involves that knowledge. I want
to pause here to emphasize the fact that I'm not saying it's harder, because
that's not true. Knowledge should give you the tools to solve problems more
easily, but there's another edge to that sword.

When taught properly, knowledge is often accompanied with wisdom. I would define
wisdom as the humility to appreciate the extent of one's ignorance. It's
almost a trope but the more you know, the more you realize how much you
don't know and have yet to learn.

I think a byproduct of knowledge and wisdom is *thoughtfulness*.
It can help you make fewer rash decisions by encouraging you to spend
more time weighing the variables at stake when solving a problem.

In order to weigh variables, you need to be able to hold them all in your
mind at the same time. This is why being a judge must be excruciating.

In this industry of what people sometimes refer to as "knowledge work",
there is an almost unstated understanding that what we refer to as "flow"
is the state of mind required in order to make thoughftul decisions while
weighing all the necessary variables.

When I try to explain this process to outsiders, I often use a computer
as a metaphor — which seems fitting. In order to compute, a computer often
needs to download data before it can even parse and analyze it. This is
exactly what I believe flow helps "knowledge workers" like programmers
and designers achieve. Slowly at first, faster as time elapses, we start
placing all the facts about a problem at the forefront of our mind — our
[Random-access memory](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Random-access_memory).

The reason Bose Mode is so crucial is because any interruption, any loss
of focus during such a critical phase means starting from scratch may be
necessary. At the very least you will need to retrace your steps
in order to make sure you didn't lose an important fact due to the
interuption. When electrical current stops flowing through a computer's
RAM, all the information it contained is irretrievably lost. That's
because RAM is *volatile memory*, unlike the *non-volatile* memory of a
hard drive or SSD. I find the similarity between humans and machines here
striking.

Physically isolating yourself from the sounds of the world is a way to
achieve flow which doesn't rely on the courtesy or cooperation of others.
During my time at Full Sail, I've managed to achieve flow in a busy Firehouse
Subs restaurant at rush hour while sitting under a TV blasting ESPN's SportCenter.
All this thanks to my pair of noise canceling headphones and a base layer of
lyric-less music[^1] that didn't subtract from my attention. The advantage
of "Bose Mode" is that most actively noise canceling heaphones have an LED
which shows whether the noise canceling mode is on. This can act as a mild
deterrent to interruptions if people notice that not only you have headphones
on, but you're clearly trying to block out external noise as well.

If you talk to any programmer who travels regularly, ask them what they
do on a plane. On flights with no Internet access available, a roomful of
strangers in the sky with the right pair of headphones can encourage rare
feats of concentration and complex problem-solving. Thanks to Bose Mode, you
will also barely even notice the heavy hum of the plane's engines.

All in all I'd encourage any "knowledge worker" to be aware of how
volatile their optimal state of mind to achieve productive work is.
You don't need to receive a popup notification and sound whenever an
email comes in. You don't need to see a little badge number increment on
your phone for that either. Email is not chat, it should be able to wait
at least a few hours. If you have urgent email, then simply check it
more often. At least you'll be doing that on your own schedule and not be
at the mercy of other people's schedule.

Start using great isolation features like OS X and iOS's Do Not Disturb
modes. On OS X, hold `⌥ (Option)` and click on the Notification Center
in your Menu Bar (the rightmost icon). This will grey out the icon and
will turn off all notifications until you `⌥` click it again. It's a
really useful tool to use when your brain is fully loaded and you've
achieved flow with the help of Bose Mode.

There are many other ways you can exert more control over what is allowed
to interrupt you during your work, but none is as important as the
realization of how costly these interruptions are to your ability to do
good work with velocity.

[^1]: I highly recommend [Tycho](http://www.rdio.com/artist/Tycho/), the [Inception soundtrack](http://www.rdio.com/artist/Hans_Zimmer/album/Inception_(Music_From_The_Motion_Picture)), the [Tron: Legacy soundtrack](http://www.rdio.com/artist/Daft_Punk/album/TRON_Legacy/), [Zero 7](http://www.rdio.com/artist/Zero_7/), [Bonobo](http://www.rdio.com/artist/Bonobo/) or any music with sufficiently steady rythm and few lyrics. If you don't know where to get started, you can try my own [Flow playlist](http://www.rdio.com/people/OlivierLacan/playlists/344415/Flow/)
