---
layout: post
title: "Emotional Power"
date: 2014-02-04 17:59
location: "Sainte-Anne, Martinique, France"
categories: life
draft: true
---
I was an early employee at Code School and I wasn't hired on technical
grounds. I didn't do a technical interview. I'm convinced — despite
disagreement from my peers — that I wouldn't pass the kind of technical
interview we've put our most recent developer hires through.

It's not so much a feeling of inadequacy that makes me say this as a
healthy dose of self-awareness. My biggest value is not my prowess as a
programmer. I was an okay web designer, I learned enough to be an okay
web developer. Mostly, I think I have good taste and strong opinions,
occasionally loosely held.

The problem with strong opinions is that they're not always needed (or
appreciated), and that they are intensely flavored by the nature and
function of the opinionator. When the company is very young and the
employee has recently joined, any strong opinion is seen as a risky
move. Throwing your two cents can actually cost you a lot more than that
and it's common for people to respect you for that. They will actually
listen to your opinion because it probably wasn't easy or safe for you
to share it.

Now contrast this with an early employee who — three or four years down
the line — shares a similar strong opinion. If that employee is well-
liked within their company, then they have garnered what I call
emotional power. Their peers respect them, whether or not they have
acquired organizational power. Because of that emotional power, people
will listen. The problem is that they will not necessarily listen
because the opinion is valid. They may very well listen because the
opinion comes from someone you can't easily dismiss. People who have
been at the company for longer or as long as the opinionator may very
well consider this an abuse of (emotional) power.

As your tenure and popularity rises within a company, so does the degree
of your responsibility regarding the opinions you decide to share
publicly.

This is clearly a double-edged sword. Unless I give in to a power trip
(which depends on my character alone), my strong opinions are born out
of the same basic elements today compared to four years ago. Sure, I've
changed. I've dulled to some things and become more incensed about
others. But I don't believe the fluctuations are large enough. I don't
believe that I use my strong opinions less sparingly that I did in the
past.

The solution many leaderships settle on when it comes to likeable early
employees with sizeable emotional power is to ask them to submit their
strong opinions privately. In my mind that betrays an inherent lack of
trust in the fellow members of the team who would hear the strong
opinion being voiced. They may think that "rocking the boat" will cause
more harm than good. I have to admit it's possible. There are
appropriate ways to share opinions. Publicly shaming or embarrassing
someone as a side-effect of making a point is rarely a good idea. Sure,
you may imagine that the value provided by the opinion and ensuing
conversation or debate about it will outweigh the harm. But that too me
sounds a lot like justifying the means with the end.
