---
layout: post
title: The Fear of Pairing
date: 2018-03-25 18:50
location: "Paris, France"
categories: development
draft: true
---

Nowadays, [pair programming][pair] with someone for the first time is
always exciting for me. Whether they're more or less experienced than I
am, I know we will learn a ton from each other. Wether it's because they
make me explain something I thought I understood, but in fact had
incomplete knowledge of; or because they take something that used to
intimidate me and make it easily relatable. It's always a learning
opportunity for both parties in some way.

A few years into my programming career, it was often an anxiety-inducing
experience for me to even *think* about the idea of working with a more
senior developer so closely. Would they think I'm useless? Would they
notice that I don't understand some basic computer science principles
that they might deem necessary to fulfill the duties of my postion? Or
more simply, would they find my tools inadequate compared to theirs?

This was all rooted in the fact that I was convinced my pairs would
discover that I had no idea what I was doing. Which to be fair, was
true. And still is, in many respects.

Thankfully, as many programmers find out as their career unfolds, the
dreaded unmasking moment doesn't really ever happen. That is, unless
you're unfortunate enough to encounter a toxic senior programmer who
feels powerful when they put down other people. If you ever do encounter
someone like that — or if you already did — the problems is theirs not
yours. I hope you can find a way to isolate yourself from people like
this. You may be able to learn some techniques from them, but you risk
adopting horrible habits that will impact your own career negatively and
the well-being of your team.

What does happen after a few uncomfortable pairing sessions when you
finally find some comfort in pair programming is that you start to
realize that everybody has some knowledge or perspective that can
benefit their pair. But also that everyone becomes a bit better at
pretending they have their shit together as time goes by. Whether it's
because it bolsters them to feel like their expertise and opinions are
valued by their peers, or because they start to notice their own growth
through active collaboration.

Although it might be anecdotal evidence, I didn't get fired right after
my first pairing session with a much more senior developer. After a
while, I started finding solace in the fact that if I had been so
*shockingly bad* my pair might have taken the time to tell someone else
how much I sucked. Or at least take me aside to tell me what I needed to
improve.

I know that people who have discovered the virtues of pairing can often
seem a little too eager. It's hard to not feel intimated by people who
look so comfortable with their own skills that they're willing to have
them scrutinized so closely. It almost feels as if someone chooses to be
micro-managed by a fellow programmer.

But that's not at all what healthy pairing (even beyond programming)
looks like. There are many styles and flavors of pair programming. Some
like [mobbing][mob] even sound dangerously close to the dreaded
[Design by Committee][dbc]. My simplest token for successful pair
programming is engagement. This is hardest to deal with in remote pair
programming scenarios — which is what I do the most — because you often
can't *see* your pair. You may start to get the creeping sensation that
one of the pairs is going too fast and that their pair *checked out*
either because they don't feel comfortable enough to ask a question, or
because the rhythm doesn't work for them, or worse, because they feel
that they have nothing to contribute. Which is not true.

Even a very senior programmer has something to gain from collaborating
with a complete beginner. For example, experts make many assumptions
based on past experience. Beginners don't have past experience to build
biases from.

In the case of software, an expert programmer could be trying to
shoehorn a solution that has worked before instead of trying something
that may be more appropriate to the specific problem at hand. Or they
could assume that a complex solution will be more sustainable without
bothering to make the case for its upfront cost to their less
experienced collaborator. Having to prove the worthiness of a solution
that may appear not to require a proof anymore is exactly why pairing
with diverse people is incredibly valuable.

And by diverse I mean **actually** diverse: ethnically, linguistically,
philosophically, sexually, physically, gender-wise and age-wise. Biases
are everywhere and they are preventing us from seeing alternative paths
and solutions that can be simpler, more elegant, and more sustainable
just because we're dogmatically holding on to the solutions and
perspectives we're comfortable with. More importantly this is how the
best teams are built.

Some of my best pairing experiences ever came from working with people
who had a different gender, ethnicity, and knowledge than me. They
might have known more about computer science than I did, but I had a bit
more practical experience with building software; we weren't offended or
bothered by the same things; we didn't even feel challenged by the same
kinds of problems which means we could take turns supporting each other
depending on what kind of task lay ahead.

All of this is to say that the fear of pair programming is *valid*.
You're not weird and sheepish for having it. If you've managed to
prevail over that feer, great! Help others do the same. But don't forget
how hard it was to imagine before you managed to pass that hurdle. If
you're still looking at pair programming like a huge monolith looming
over you, also know that there are plenty of people who work fine
without it. I think they're missing out, but that doesn't mean I don't
like to work alone from time to time so I can dive deeply into a problem
on my own.

[mob]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mob_programming
[pair]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pair_programming
[dbc]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Design_by_committee
