---
layout: post
title: The Fear of Pairing
date: 2018-04-08 20:06
location: "Paris, France"
categories: development
---

**These days**, I'm always eager when I have a chance to [pair program][pair]
with someone for the first time. Whether they're more or less
experienced than I am, I know that we'll most likely learn a ton from
each other. Maybe they'll make me explain something I thought I
understood, but in fact had incomplete knowledge of; or maybe they'll
take something that used to intimidate me and make it easily relatable.
It's always a learning opportunity for both parties in some way.

**A few years into my programming career**, it was often an anxiety-inducing
experience for me to even *think* about working with a more senior
developer so closely. To see them see me work. Would they think I'm
useless? Would they notice that I don't understand some basic computer
science principle they might deem necessary to do my job? Or would they
find my tools inadequate compared to theirs?

These fears were all rooted in my convinction that my pairs would
discover that I had no idea what I was doing. Which to be fair, was
true and still is, in many respects.

Thankfully, as many programmers find out as their career unfolds, the
dreaded unmasking moment doesn't really ever happen. That is, unless
you're unfortunate enough to encounter a toxic programmer who feels
powerful when they put down other people or who somehow decides to self-
righteously gatekeep against the uncivilized hordes of junior
programmers.

If you ever encounter someone like that — or if you already did — please
know that the problems is theirs, not yours. I hope you can find a way
to isolate yourself from such toxic people or find diplomatic ways to
ask them to quit acting like assholes. Sure, you may be able to learn
some techniques from them, but you also risk adopting horrible habits
that will negatively impact your own career and the well-being of your
team. Additionally, these toxic people survive by turning other people
into toxic people. That way, they don't seem that bad. They are bad.

What should happen after a few uncomfortable pairing sessions is that
you find some comfort in pair programming and you start to realize that
everybody has some knowledge or perspective that can benefit the other
pair. But also that everyone becomes a bit better at pretending they
have their shit together as time goes by. Whether it's because it
bolsters someone to feel like their expertise and opinions are valued by
their peers and pairs, or because they start to notice their own growth
through engaged collaboration and discussion.

Although it might be anecdotal evidence, I didn't get fired right after
my first pairing session with a much more senior developer. After a
while, I started finding solace in the fact that if I had been so
*shockingly bad* my pair might have taken the time to put me out my
misery. Or at least take me aside to tell me what I needed to improve.

I know that proponents of pair programming can often seem a little too
eager. It's also hard not to feel intimated by people who seem so
comfortable with their own skills that they're willing to have them
scrutinized up close. It feels as if they actually want to be
micro-managed by a fellow programmer.

But this is not what healthy pairing looks like — even beyond
programming. There are many styles and flavors of pairing. Some, like
[mobbing][mob] even sound dangerously close to the dreaded [Design by
Committee][dbc]. My simplest token for a successful pairing session is
engagement. It's harder to get this right in remote pair programming
scenarios — which is what I do the most — because you often can't *see*
your pair. You may start to get the creeping sensation that one of the
pairs is going too fast and that their pair *checked out* either because
they don't feel comfortable enough to ask a question, or because the
rhythm doesn't work for them, or worse, because they feel that they have
nothing to contribute — which is not true.

Even a very senior programmer has something to gain from collaborating
with a complete beginner. For example, while they have many more
experiences to draw from, experts also make many assumptions based on
past experience or reject ideas because of past battle scars which may
not longer be relevant. Beginners don't have past that much experience
to build biases from and they naturally have fewer horring stories
scaring them away from trying something new or different.

In the case of software, an experienced programmer could be trying to
shoehorn a solution that has worked before instead of trying something
that may be more appropriate to the specific problem at hand. Or they
could assume that a complex solution will be more sustainable without
bothering to make the case for its upfront cost to their less
experienced collaborator. Even if it worked before, you still have to
convince your pair that it's good idea. Having to prove the worthiness
of a solution that may appear not to require proof is precisely why
pairing with diverse people is incredibly valuable.

By diverse I mean **actually** diverse: ethnically, linguistically,
philosophically, sexually, physically, gender-wise and age-wise. Biases
and assumptions are everywhere and they are preventing us from seeing
alternative paths and solutions that can be simpler, more elegant, and
more sustainable just because we're dogmatically holding on to the
solutions and perspectives we're comfortable with. More importantly this
is how the best teams are built.

Some of my best pairing experiences ever came from working with people
who had different gender, ethnicity, and knowledge than me. They might
have known more about computer science, but I had a bit more practical
experience with building software; we weren't offended or bothered by
the same things; we didn't even feel challenged by the same kinds of
problems which meant we could take turns supporting each other depending
on what kind of task lay ahead.

All of this is to say that the fear of pair programming is *valid*.
You're not weird and sheepish for having it. If you've managed to
prevail over that feer, great! Help others do the same. But don't forget
how hard it was to imagine before you succeeded over the hurdle. If
you're still looking at pairing like a huge monolith looming over you,
also know that there are plenty of people who successfully work without
it. My opinion is that they're missing out, but that doesn't mean I
don't like to work alone from time to time so I can dive deeply into a
problem on my own. Even if the growing rabbit ears often remind me that
I'm missing my pairs.

[mob]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mob_programming
[pair]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pair_programming
[dbc]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Design_by_committee
