---
layout: post
title: "The Cover Matters"
date: 2014-12-17 21:20
update: 2023-02-05 20:19
location: "Over the Atlantic"
categories: life
draft: false
---

> You can't judge a book by its cover

You've surely had this trope dogmatically thrown at you at some
point. Perhaps by someone fond of prepackaged thinking and unsolicited
advice. It may have had uses as a tool to protect people against easy
judgement, but when generalized in its popular form, it's thoughtless.

I'm going to make a daring assumption: you and I agree that design
usually tends to improve things. I know, a certain Jony has recently
proved to us that designers who achieve a little bit too much power can
in fact make things worse for a lot of people. But in general, design is
a system of thinking with the purpose of achieving something not only
beautiful but functional and friendly to its user as well.

If we do agree on this definition, here's what a book's cover tells me
about what's inside. It tells me that someone involved in the creation
of the book cared about its initial perception. The perception that
someone with no prior knowledge of the book, its author, its publisher,
its subject — anything — would have about the book.

Caring about a the cover takes humility and empathy. Despite their
involvement bias, whoever does care about the cover realizes that there
may be humans on earth who do not know why *this* book matters. Why they
should read it.

There are some essential elements to a cover. Just imagine for a second
an utterly blank cover: a pure white piece of thick paper. What does it
tell you about the book? It tells you that someone, perhaps the author,
believes that it's unnecessary for the book to have any external means
of identification. This is an extreme example. It's always
easier to reveal the cracks in an argument when you push its to its
logical limit.

Now let's take a beautiful cover. It has everything. The title and the
author's name are carefully printed with an elegant typeface and located
unambiguously on the front and the spine. There's an interesting
illustration that attracts attention in a bookstore regardless of the
prospective reader's artistic preference. If the title doesn't make the
subject of the book self-evident, perhaps there's a short subtitle which
will secure the interest of someone whose attention was captured from
afar but perhaps wasn't exactly sure of the subject matter. If there are
pull-quotes in the back, they're not ridiculously superlative but they
simply ignite more curiosity if they originate from people who the
passerby respects and whose opinion they trusts.

Let's stop here. Wouldn't you judge this cover significantly differently
that you would the blank one? Aside from the fact that a blank cover
would admittedly make a book stand out, the odds of you not even being
able to judge the blank cover because you won't see it are great.

It doesn't take bad design to make good design stand out. It helps, of
course. In a sea of blue icons, a red one stands out. It's a statement.
You will judge that statement. It will give you information, however
tenuous, about the application behind the icon.

A few years ago I was looking for an accountant. Despite being the son
of an accountant, I know next to nothing about the topic. Especially
because what little I knew related to accounting in France, not in the
U.S. From experience, I only had a few keywords to help me in my search.
I knew I was looking for a CPA, Certified Public Accountant. After
unsuccessfully asking a few friends for a recommendation, my patience
ran short and I decided to take two approaches: Google and Yelp.

I assumed that Google would be littered with paid ads and SEO-gamed
results (it was) which would limit my ability to discern good choices
from bad ones considering I basically had no criteria to compare a good
from a bad CPA. Moreover I didn't expect an accountant's website to help
me judge whether they were good at what they do. Unlike web designers,
their job isn't to maintain an attractive website.

My one hope laid in the book's cover. Devoid of an ability to judge the
substance of something, appearances turn into a powerful signal. So I
loaded up a dozen of CPA websites. I filtered the ones with the highest
ratings on Yelp and the ones that appeared to be from my local area in
Google. I wanted to meet this person. I needed to be able to trust them.

Immediately I saw a barage of stock photography. Some woefully
inadequate for accounting matter. I spotted some obvious and
unimaginative WordPress themes which were poorly adapted to the task of
conveying trustworthiness and experience.

Then something strange happened. I found a beautiful website. Clear
navigation focused on what I wanted to know: who this person is, what
they do, why it matters, and why they should be trusted.

More importantly, there was a sense of taste pervading from the
site. You could question the choice of style, but it was unquestionably
applied by someone who knew what they were doing. It didn't matter to me
whether this CPA built the site themselves or paid someone to do it. All
that mattered was that they cared. That told me a lot. The tone of the
website's copy was concise, it was fresh. It made me want to trust them
because it wasn't boilerplate and it wasn't stuffy.

Now it's possible that this website may have had a different effect on
someone older than me or someone from a less web-savvy background who
doesn't respond to these cues because they have no special appreciation
for good typography, good copy, good content design. But I believe an
effect nonetheless. Even ill-equipped to measure professionalism, people
can smell it. They can feel it. I know I did.

After leaving a message using the contact form conveniently accessible
on the home page of the site, I received a phone call from the CPA
herself. She matched her cover perfectly. She was warm, professional,
sharp and before calling me she even did her homework by looking me up
based on the email address I purposefully used on the contact form. She
knocked it out of the park.

This *superficial* impression was later confirmed when I met her and the
rest of her team. I judged a book by its cover, and it was a damn good
book. This is not the first time it has worked out well for me: books,
music, restaurants, programming language communities, and even people.

It's true that I've discovered bad books with great covers, but unless
I'm letting confirmation bias get the best of me, I've had more lucky
strikes than bad apples.

PS: Skeptics of this conclusion may delight in the fact that for whatever 
reason, a few after I started working with the CPA I mention in this post, 
they entirely ghosted me. I'm not sure if they went under, had an influx 
of much more profitable clients, a huge technical issue, or if something 
else happened. So my little anecdote took a hit. While I know some beautiful 
covers might hide nastiness, that doesn't completely change my point of 
view on the signal that a well-crafted one sends.
