---
layout: post
title: "High Fidelity Remote Communication"
date: 2021-09-30 20:16
location: "Montréal, Québec, Canada"
categories: development
summary: Remote work requires high fidelity communication and it's still not easy to achieve.
draft: true
---

This pandemic isn’t over. Before it even started, remote work was on the rise around the world. 

Why? Because it makes sense. Knowledge work doesn’t have to be centralized to crammed, loud, distracting, unhealthy open offices located in overly expensive areas. It also makes little sense for knowledge workers who work on laptop to bring that laptop to a room inside of a building they have to travel hours to and from every single day. The road hazard risks alone are absurd. 

Instead, more and more people and their bosses make the choice to work remotely. You’ll note that I don’t use the term “Work From Home”. That’s because it’s infused with the kind of butts-in-seats condescension perfected by corporate leaders. You’re not working, you’re “working from home”. Be grateful. We *let* you do that. Absent is any recognition that work is by nature remote when it happens on the Internet. Large companies have offices that are remote from one another. They rely on asynchronous communication *in some way* in order to coordinate work across cities, states, and countries.  

What’s the first thing these inexperienced remote workers complained about when the pandemic led to a massive and sudden exodus from shared offices spaces all over the world in the spring of 2020? It’s hard to communicate remotely.

No shit. It’s hard to communicate. Period. It was already hard for everyone who had to communicate with clustered remote workers who happened to be crammed inside of loud and unsanitary conference rooms (often in blatant violation of fire codes). It’s just more obvious to everyone how hard it was for remote workers to communicate before. 

I was the first fully remote worker at my employer back in 2013. It happened about as suddenly as the pandemic did. One month I was happily commuting 3 days of the week to our downtown Orlando office, the next I had to move back home to France and set up shop as an independent contractor at my old 30 square meters studio in Paris. In reality it happened over several months, but that didn’t change the fact that I was suddenly thrust into being the only full-time remote collaborator of the company. My manager at the time, Thomas Meeks, gave me one prompt: be loud about any friction you encounter, we want to make this work and you’re going to be the canary in the coal mine. 

So I was. I quickly realized that our stand up meetings where quite difficult to attend remotely. A dozen people standing in a circle in a large open space talking about what they’re currently working on doesn’t quite work with a faraway camera and a single weak microphone on a distant computer. People had to volunteer to pass a laptop around so I could hear them give their update, or at least point the camera in the general direction of the speaker. This was 2014. Our team standup included way too many people. It was easy to dismiss this problem in person. It was near unbearable remotely. I was loud. And it contributed to us eventually reducing the size of standups to people who absolutely needed to hear updates from each other. 

It’s hard to say that I thrived working 7253 kilometers and 6 timezones away from my co-workers, but somehow, I managed. I enacted a personal policy that has lasted ever since: any non-binary (yes or no) answer should lead to an audio or video call so that context can be provided much faster than through back and forth text-based chat. Any demonstration should be done over screensharing or recorded (and edited) screencast, not with lazily put together step-by-step instructions. That's because there are always missing steps, and you never identify them when you’re writing them down. You waste other people's time instead. 

THis is where we get to the meat of it all: high fidelity. By definition being *remote* means not being *there*. Presence has a way to make some things happen. A simple look can trigger a strong reaction and a sense of shared understanding. The slightest change in intonation communicates doubt or excitement better than a paragraph (or five) ever could. I was lucky to have participated in a weekly podcast called Ruby5 at work. I learned some of the intricacies of audio engineering and production. As an avid amateur photographer, I had a keen sense of how digital sensors handle lighting conditions and how those affect the representation of the human face. While in Paris, I purchased a Logitech C920 720p (1280 by 720 pixels) webcam. Because I had done some research on dynamic microphones (as opposed to the condenser microphones we used to record the podcast) I bit the bullet and bought — at my own expense — an absurdly expensive Shure SM7B microphone, a Scarlett 2i2 XLR to USB interface (to convert the analog signal to USB) and a cheap pre-amplifier with a very visible input volume level dial to punch up the notoriously low output of the Shure microphone (which is more designed for loud music than voice). 

It was… a mess. I didn’t know how to set up the audio interface. Although this was a fairly simple one. I held out on purchasing a good set of studio headphones (like the Sony MDR-7506) because I thought (wrongly) that I could have a sense for my own voice’s volume. A microphone, like a camera, doesn’t have a human’s perspective on what *loud* means. It will happily blast your co-worker’s ears off or sound like you’re a kilometer away. It’s not until someone from your team complains that you’ll notice your voice was near impossible to hear, something you never have to worry about when physically present. Until you can afford a fancy microphone or an amplifier with a live level monitor, I strongly recommend you wear monitor headphones when you talk into a microphone. All the pros do it for a reason, they don't trust the microphone to portrait their voice as intended. And no, your AirPods don’t count as proper monitors because you can only hear other voices when you wear them, not your own. Especially in noise cancellation mode. You naturally have an awareness of your own voice level in a room full of humans. A microphne has no such awareness. 

Now let’s talk about your face. Apple did something quite meaningful with FaceTime. They put the onus on precisely what makes you miss your family and friends: their face. Not where they happen to be at the time you call them, or the broad context of what’s around them in a horizontal view, but their vertical portrait. Somehow, Apple still manages to produce webcams that are as bad as they were a decade ago. Meanwhile, Apple makes some of the best selfie phone cameras in the world. 

I started out with a relatively cheap webcam: the Logitech C920. It's a workhorse. It was released in 2012 and its resolution is only 720p. Yet for nearly a decade this webcam made sense considering how little bandwidth you could dedicate to display a face on the Internet. In the late 2010s, more webcams manufacturers introduced full HD or 1080p resolution, and later 4K (1920 by 2180 pixels). It was and still is a fairly unnecessary output for a face on a screen. But just as photography cameras were taken over by the megapixel wars so too did the webcam industry only focus on raw output size, rather than output quality, especially in low light. 

Compared to the camera sensors that are now commpon on mobile phones, wecams are terrible. My friend Justin Searls found a way to use his iPhone as a webcam. This seems obvious. It’s far more practical than the solution I arrived at before the pandemic: using a Sony A6000 mirrorless camera with an expensive 35mm lens and an Elgato Cam Link 4K acquisition card so I can use a sensor and lens combo no webcam maker can compete with. 

This setup is never the one I recommend to fellow remoters, especially folks that aren’t deeply familiar with photography of videography. It’s cumbersome, complex, and requires constant fidgeting. Keeping the camera on, making sure the color temperature is fixed, the aperture wide enough to prevent frequent automatic focus hunting, and the battery replaced with a dummy powe adapter to prevent runtime issues. 

Two long years into this pandemic, the only company that seems to have grasped the importance of a quality sensor and lens combo is Elgato, with their Facecam. Logitech has been on top of the webcam business for years, and their best offering is the Logitech Brio. A excellent camera sensor on a far too wide camera that befits YouTubers with carefully crafted backdrops far more than remote workers whose face should be the sole focus, not their environment. You *can* force the 4K Logitech Brio to crop most of the background it defaults to showing so you can display what truly matters — your face — but it takes some futzing with settings which should be unnecessary.
